FIVE LAYER MODEL-------------------------------------- 

Application 
|
Traffic
|
Networking
|
Data Link
|
Physical


NETWORKING DEVICES ------------------------------------

Cables - may be copper or fibre
	Copper - (vary voltage)common: Cat5, cat5e, cat6
		cat5e - greater maximum distance than cat6, but less reliable
	Fibre - (vary light)
	
Collision Domain - Network segment where only one device can communicate at a time

Hubs - connects many computers at once
	all devices talk to all other devices connected to a single hub. It's up to the devices to filter out the messages meant for them
	Layer 1 device

Switch - Layer 2 device
	Can inspect protocol data, determine which system the data is intended for, and send it to that system alone
	
Routers - Layer 3 devices
	Device that can forward data between independent devices
	Inspects IP data to decide where to send things
	Core routers - sophisticated routers that ISPs use. Forms the backbone of the Internet. Routers share data with each other using BGP.

Server - Programs or machines whose primary purpose is to provide, or "serve," data to a client.

THE PHYSICAL LAYER-------------------------------

Moves 1s and 0s over a physical link
Line coding - using variations in voltage or any sort of signal to represent 1s and 0s.

Twisted Pairs
	Copper wires twisted together
	Twisting mitigates crosstalk
	
Network Ports, Patch ports
	RJ45 - Registered Jack 45. Plug which exposes wires in twisted pair cables.
	Ports usually have two LEDs, link light and activity light
		Link light - Cable is properly connected to two devices which are both powered on
		Activity light - data is being sent through the port.

DATA LINK LAYER----------------------------------	

Ethernet - Uses the physical layer to send data so that layers above the data link layer need no knowledge of the physical layer.
	CSMA/CD - Listen, if no data being transmitted then send, if collision detected wait for some random interval.
	MAC address(media access control address) - globallly unique identifier attached to an individual network interface 
		48 bit number, 6 groups of 2 hexadecimal digits.
		First 3 octets are organizationally unique identifiers if bit1 of the first octet is 0, else, MAC address is locally administered.
		if bit 0 = 0, unicast, else if bit0=1, multicast
		
	Ethernet frame
		
		Preamble - 8 bytes, where the last byte is the SFD, start frame delimiter
		Destination address
		Source address
		Tag - 4 bytes, VLAN tag, used for making virtual LANs
		Ether type - 2 bytes, used to describe the protocol or the contents of the frame.
		Payload - 46-1500 bytes 
		Frame Check Sequence - 4 bytes, represents checksum for entire frame. Uses cyclical redundancy check. If CRC calculated at receiving end is not equal to CRC transmitted, then some error in transmission occurred


THE NETWORK LAYER-----------------------------------

IP addresses - 32 bit numbers, represented by dotted decimal notation. 4 octets separated by dots, with the decimal value of each octet.
	IP addresses belong to a network, not a device.
	
IPv4 datagrams -  

	key: NameOfSegment(number of bits)
															Total bytes
															-----------
	Version(4) Hlen(4) Service Type(8) Total Length(16)		4
	Identification(16) Flags(3) Fragment Offset(13)			8	
	TTL(8) Protocol(8) Header Checksum(16)					12
	Source(32)												16
	Destination(32)											20
	Options(x) padding(32n - x)								32n + 20
	Payload													0-65535


Routing tables - 
	basic columns: 
		destination network - IP address and network mask
			in classful routing, mask is implied in address itself. 	
			in CIDR(Classless Interdomain Routing), separate column which specifies length, in bits, of network mask.
			there is usually a catchall entry for networks that router doesn't understand(maybe a router higher up on hierarchy)
		next hop - IP of next router intended for destination network, or the host the destination address denotes.
		total hops - the number of hops between router and destination net
		interface - the interface through which the router needs to forward a particular packet, in order for the packet to reach next hop.


Autonomous systems: 
	collection of networks that fall under the control of a single network operator
	named using ASNs, Autonomous System Numbers. Allocation managed by IANA(Internet Assigned Numbers Authority)


Interior Gateway Protocols - Route data within an autonomous system.
	two main types: 
		link state routing - 
			each router advertises state of each interface. interfaces connect to other routers or networks
			each router knows about state of every other router on the autonomous system
			takes into account latency, bandwidth of links
			runs algorithms against knowledge to determine best path
			requires more memory
			requires more processing power	
			have come to replace distance vector protocols
			
		distance vector - 
			old standard.
			simple
			uses list of networks known to it and how far away these networks are in terms of hops.
			routers don't know state of autonomous system
			routers only know their immediate neighours.


Exterior Gateway Protocols - Route data between routers on network edges representing autonomous systems.


Specific routing protocols - 
	Distance Vector:
		RIP: Routing Information Protocol
			RIPv1 routers broadcast updates with routing table every 30 seconds
			Uses UDP
		EIGRP: Enhanced Interior Gateway Routing Protocol
			uses incremental updates
			replaced IGRP
			supports classless IPv4 addresses
			proprietary, owned by Cisco	
			uses neighbour table, topology table
			backwards compatibility with IGRP
	Link State:
		OSPF: Open Shortest Path First
			supports CIDR
			implements dijkstra's algorithm
			adapts to changing network conditions
			maintains link state databases
			
	Exterior:
		BGP: Border Gateway Protocol
			is a path vector protocol
			makes decisions based on paths, network policies, rule sets
			uses TCP as transport protocol

Non-routable address space - 
	RFC 1918: some networks defined as non-routable space
		gateway routers won't forward traffic to this type of network
		10.0.0.0/8, 172.16.0.0/12, 192.168.0.0/16




THE TRANSPORT LAYER---------------------------------------
Basically responsible for multiplexing, demultiplexing traffic at hosts, managing end-to-end connections and so on.

port - 16 bit number used to direct traffic to specific services.
	eg. HTTP uses port 80, FTP 21
	0 used in communications between programs on same computer
	1 - 1023 system ports, well known ports, like HTTP, FTP
	1024 - 49151 registered ports, other network services.
	49152 - 65535 ephemeral ports. used in establishing outbound connections. clients usually assigned ephemeral ports.

socket - IP Address + ":" + port number

TCP header - 
													total bytes---
													______________
							
	Source port(16), Destination port(16)			4
	Sequence number(32)								8
	Acknowledgement number(32)						12
	Hdr length(4),(6),Cntrlflgs(6),Window(16)		16
	Chksum(16), Urgent(16)							20
	Options, if any
	Payload
	
TCP control flags: URG, ACK, PSH - push currently buffered data to app asap, RST - reset connection to recover after some failure, SYN - used in handshake, FIN - transmitting computer has no more data to send


Three Way Handshake - 
	SYN - establish connection
	SYN/ACK
	ACK

Four Way Handshake - 
	FIN - computer ready to close connection
	ACK
	FIN
	ACK

TCP socket states - (different OSs use different states, however)
	LISTEN - server side. ready and listening for incoming connections.
	SYN_SENT - client side. SYN sent but no connection
	SYN_RECEIVED - server side. socket in listen, sent SYN/ACK, no ACK received
	ESTABLISHED - ACK received, connection established.
	FIN_WAIT - FIN has been sent, no ACK received
	CLOSE_WAIT - connection closed, but application is still holding socket.
	CLOSED - connection fully terminated.


NETWORK SERVICES------------------------------------------------------



DNS: Domain Name Server(uses UDP) (port 53)

	Resource Record Types: 
		A - point a certain domain name at a certain IP address
		AAAA - points domain name to IPv6 address
		CNAME - redirect traffic from one domain to another(eg. facebook.com -> www.facebook.com) short for canonical name
		MX - mail server names
		SRV - service record. define location of specific services
		TXT - descriptive text with domain name, originally. Now often used to communicate configuration protocols	
		NS, SOA - define authority information about DNS zones Start Of Authority, Name Server(other servers responsible for this zone)


	FQDN : Fully Qualified Domain Name. DNS can support up to 127 levels for a single domain name. Each section can only be 63 chars, and complete FQDN is limited to 255 chars.

	full recursive resolution- 
		root name server : 13 total root name servers, direct queries to TLD name server. Contacted via any cast.
		TLD : Top Level Domain(the com part of .com). redirects to authoritative name servers
		authoritative name servers : last two parts of a domain name, resolution at which any single organization may be responsible for domain lookups. domain and subdomains belonging to an entity(like www.google)


	types - 
		caching name server - holds recently resolved ip addresses
			uses TTL to limit time an entry is remembered
		recursive name server - performs full recursive resolution
		root name server
		TLD server
		authoritative name server

	DNS Zones - 
		Each server is responsible for a zone
		administrative authority of name server does not cover subdomains(eg. TLD server for .com does not cover google.com)
		


DHCP - Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol(UDP port 67 listen, UDP port 68 client source port)

	DHCPDISCOVER - broadcast destination, 0.0.0.0 source
	DHCPOFFER - depending on policy, offers IP addresses
		broadcast destination, its own IP addr. source.
	DHCPREQUEST - asks to be assigned offered IP addr.
		source 0.0.0.0, dst 255.255.255.255
	DHCPACK - server assigns IP addr. 
		source - it's own, dst - 255.255.255.255

NAT - Network Address Translation
	Port Preservation - uses source port(of outgoing traffic) to direct traffic back to the right computer
	Port Forwarding - traffic for specific destination ports delivered to specific nodes. Eg port 80 traffic goes to web server. 

VPN - Virtual Private Networks
	Uses tunnels
	VPN client tunnels to VPN server
	Encrypted payload that contains network, transport packet, encapsulated in another packet. VPN server unencrypts payload, and it appears as if this packet came from a device within the network
